You, uh, just briefly at the end as well,
if you've got about two minutes, right?
Good afternoon, Dr. Nice to have you here.
Can you hear us? We've got, you are on mute though.
Can't hear you. Can you, can you get your mute button? Okay.
Brilliant. Okay, great. Look, thank you very much.
Um, welcome to this, uh, zoom submission, uh, process.
We've got you down for 10 minutes.
Uh, we've got some, uh, members on Zoom,
some members in the room.
Uh, and, um, I'll give you a call at about three minutes
to go if you're still speaking, um, just to say we,
we always like to ask questions,
get a bit of to and fro going.
So, um, time is in your mor uh, afternoon johana as well.
The time is in your hands.
Uh, thank you for this time.
I'm just gonna take my submission as read.
Yes. Um, firstly, I wanna say that the league,
we are not opposed to progress
and we also are not, not opposed to owners making land deals
with the government as long as the balance of power is equal
and fairness is weighted equally for all parties.
So, um, I've, um, read the
document must have been commissioned by the government
by Minter Allison Redwood, um,
which notes the significant public implications
and quote notably the trade off between
new compensation rights with weaker appeal options
in the case of critical infrastructure acquisitions, uh,
the leagues just opposed to attempts to railroad people
who do not have the resources to fight the government,
where the balance of power is tipped in favor
of the government's agenda.
Uh, from my reading, um, I understand
that landowners who object to the removal
of their land being taken will need, need to appeal to the
minister or local authority instead
of the environment court.
So the authority that is approving the acquisition
is also the same authority that the landowner has to go to
for an appeal of the acquisition, which really seems,
well it is unfair, uh, the balance of power sits
with the minister or the local authority.
Um, my submission is quite short.
Um, our recommendation is that this bill goes back
to the drawing board to put the balance
of power equally for all of those.
So there's a living level playing field,
particularly for the owners.
Um, the rapport from Minter, um,
Alison Red Watts also makes mention
of a subsequent bill that's coming.
So, um, it, I don't know what that bill is.
Um, but that report also talks about there
will be compensation to given to
separately owned dwellings on Maori land
rather than compensation to owners of land.
And I know this is not the bill we are talking about here,
but it seems connected
and so I'm just raising that, um, now, uh,
because it's, um, um, uh, it'll be good
to have a no surprises approach
in case the subsequent bill comings actually gonna impact
this bill that's gonna be,
that the government's looking to put in place.
That's really the, um, basis of my, um, submission really
is about power base.
Thank you very much. Um, we have plenty of time
for questions, so, um, who you wanna kick us off?
Yeah,
it's wonderful to see the Maori Women's Welfare League here
and sharing particularly on the balance of power
and also, I guess, you know, um, the, the worry
that you are right, that the consenting authority
or the minister in charge, uh, is also the person
who will approve whether your land gets taken
or not, should you challenge it.
Um, that, that's a really, really uh, important point for us
as a panel to hear and and understand.
Um, and thinking about also Fwa Maori, do you have
A, do you have a que johana? Do you have a
Question? Yes, I'm gonna Fen
Maori now. You wake up everybody's time.
Yes, I'm gonna fenra Maori Now in terms of Fenra Maori,
this legislation, uh, shares that as Maori land owners,
should we, uh, object, uh, to the taking of our fwa
that we can go to the environment court, uh,
that's still there and it remains in place.
Do you have any fa and knowledge and,
and thoughts around, um, actually, you know, the challenges
for Maori to go to the environment court generally
and the costs that Maori bear, um, which,
which are tough on our people.
Um, any fa and experiences that you might be able to share?
Uh, well the only ones I have personally is actually we
just, me and my siblings are just, uh, waiting
to hear from the Maori LandCorp in terms
of our succession to our parents.
So we are at the behest of that system
before we can actually be, um, you know,
legal owners I guess.
And so my worry is that that, um, ability for us
to have a say is not yet on the table
'cause we are not confirmed owners or
nor have we succeeded to our mother yet
because it has to go through another
process for that to happen.
So my worry is a whole bunch of people like us
who are waiting to succeed to our parents, uh,
we don't get the opportunity, does that mean that could,
this bill can go
and take the land that we yet to succeed to?
So that's number one. The second one is obviously the costs.
Um, uh, this is new ground for my siblings
and I like probably many others.
So it's a minefield to actually navigate
the systems that we would have to engage with.
And therefore the costs we've got at this time, no idea
because we are waiting on a process to be completed.
Um, and I suspect that's like many others.
If I may supplement, can I ask you
Only if, only if it's quick hua?
Yeah, just in terms of the compensation, it's proposed
that, um, there can be compensation payments
to individual dwellings on F Maori.
Um, that's interesting because as we know by
and large in Fen Maori you have an administrator
or an AHU F trust in place.
So do you think that the, the review
and the understanding of actually
how Fen Maori operates is reflected in the bill?
Well, well not the subsequent bill that's been discussed
because it talks about separately owned dwellings on land.
Uh, well we are, we are a potential owner when we're not
yet got to that point yet.
So what I'm worried about is that our ability to have
to retain land through wha papa is going to be lost to us
because we are not legally owners,
nor do we have a dwelling unit.
Okay. Colleagues, any other questions
before I take one look?
Um, look, can you just walk us through, um, Dr.
Tappa the length of time.
So I'm not familiar with the, um,
the Maori LandCorp process in terms of succeeding, uh,
your parents, your, your, you
and your siblings succeeding, your parents, what's the type
of land we're talking about?
Is, is it, what's the the,
the original ownership arrangement
and what is the process that has to go lo uh, through
with the Maori land court and is it different in terms
of length to what a normal, uh,
court probate process would be?
Well, my father died in 1989.
Well, crikey notes noticed.
So, so we, we, we are the owners,
but our mother was the beneficiary, um,
and she passed last year.
Ah, okay. So, So you know,
like your guess is as good as mine.
'cause I'm new at this and there's probably plenty
of other people who are just succeeding for the first time.
Um, you know, we do have a lot of people who are,
are aging now
and this might be a situation circumstance
that's occurring in lots of other families too.
So was was the la just to be clear,
the land was owned by your parents
And they collective it's collectively owned land.
Ah, okay. That's what I was looking for. Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
Yeah. But you know, like it, that's kind of irrelevant
to me because I still want to be able to have a say
Yes Over that land.
Okay. I was trying to get a feel
for whether it was Ma LandCorp
because it's collective as opposed to individual.
Oh yes, yes.
Yeah. Thank you. Okay.
Um, any other questions, colleagues for I No,
we're all very good, but thank you.
You've, um, we will get some thank you advice on the Maori
Land court process in relation to this as well.
Kia. Kia, Kiara. Thank you,
Kiara.
Okay, We have, we don't have um, Maria yet,
but we do have Sharon, so we'll,
we'll put Sharon on the, on the Zoom if we can.
Sharon will just have to accept the prompt.
She coming, Uh, Sharon will be now. Okay.
Kiara, Sharon here.
Kiara, Sharon, welcome.
Um, we've got, uh, mps both in the room
and uh, on Zoom, uh, we've got your submission,
which you can take as read, uh,
but if you wanna highlight any
elements of that, that's great.
Uh, and if you wanna leave any time for questions,
we always appreciate that and a bit of, uh, bit of dialogue.
Um, I'll give you a call in about two minutes to go, but
otherwise you've got five minutes and the time is yours.
Okay, Kiara, thank you.
Um, the select committee, um, dealing with the Public Works,
um, amendment Act.
Um, yeah, just wanna express, you know, um,
the frustration with the, regarding the blitzkrieg
of Fast Track legislation, uh, that is, um,
blatantly, um, breaching.
Um, and in regards
to the Public Works Act, um,
I'm currently in the Eastern Bay of Plenty in or Port
and I didn't have access
'cause it's such a quick turnaround.
Um, my, um, submission is isn't that comprehensive?
'cause I was at a meeting and I was told about it
and I just submitted it just before it closed.
So, um, but I just wanna, um, you know,
um, acknowledge Dr.
Hope Maori Women's Welfare League about that, um,
uh, the balance of power
and, uh, certainly, um, Maori have the, the partnership
regarding or signed by our ancestors.
There's never been a partnership today, uh, to, you know,
um, right up until now.
But I wanna make reference to, um, lands of ours
that were taken under the Public Works Act, uh,
along State Highway 35, um,
on the East Coast.
And, um, you know, I have reports in Gisborne
'cause that's where I live, but I don't have
access 'cause I haven't had time.
I've been away for it at a, a big,
so, um, if I had, um, more time, I would've been able
to reference some, um, sections
and of the Public Works Act, uh, reports
that were written in regards to our, um, claim process for
here now.
Um, our land was taken
and under the Pur Public Works Act, I've been trying to,
just on a personal level, I've been trying to, um, well,
I have contacted the Whakatane Regional Council, um, NZTA
because these, um, these big, um, s um, under the,
under the highway and it's eating away at our funeral.
It's, you know, it's enough
that our land was taken under the public's work Public Works
Act, but when you're trying to, um, they,
they literally passed the buck, you know,
like I'm just being sent around in a, um, merry-go-round
and nobody's taking responsibility to address the issues
with the, um, with the s on our land.
And I dare say that'll be happening, um, uh,
along the whole East coast in the, the rest of New Zealand.
So I wanna just just point that out
as very frustrating working with,
and, you know, the O Ombudsman, um, um, stated recently,
you know, even with, um, settlements, um, and,
and legislation that has been passed, um,
government departments, um,
and ministries are still, um, inept at, um, ensuring
that the, um, the, you've got,
you've got two minutes left Sharon.
Okay, then. So, uh, well the Crown continues to alienate,
um, Maori, um, Rana is still not,
um, recognized.
Um, we still have paper roads, um, that need
to be formally removed, uh, returned back to our people
both on my, um, Eastern Bay of Plenty Side
and Gisborne where I currently live.
I wanna ensure that, um, the, um,
public Works Act authentically protects the mana of
ORI and, um,
and then, um, stop the compulsory acquisition of Maori free
Land without consent, amend the act
and ensure that it honors TEI or Ang
and undrip establish a Maori lead authority with MANA
to ensure Maori Public Works Act addresses, um,
generational theft, um, mandate consultation with PU
and Iwi to ensure
exercise and has mana and is implemented.
Um, and then, um, you know, yeah, I've already,
um, um, shared what the frustration
of generational theft and the ongoing
and Maori land has always been targeted under a whole range
of legislation,
unscrupulous legislation in including the Maori,
the Public Works Act.
Um, and it's just an abomination.
That's, um, what I, so I'm ready
for questions if you have any.
Uh, well, we've got 13 seconds left,
so Johana very quick one.
No preamble this time.
Bye-bye Sharon, wonderful to see you today.
Um, really wanting to unpack with you your RO around the,
um, application.
So should the legislation have an embedded clause
to ensure that all levels of
UA are included in consultation on public works, takings,
Definitely all of that and more honor.
Okay, Sharon, thank you very much. That's very clear.
Um, we don't have any more time for any other questions,
but we appreciate the time you've put into
this. Thank you. Okay.
Kiara. Kiara, Sharon, do we have, uh,
she's put out So environmental, okay,
so it looks like Maria has pulled out
and so we have now we have Echo,
looks like Kath, morning Kath or afternoon I should say.
Yeah, who knows. Um, that we've am all know,
I just didn't gather whether there was someone coming in
ahead of me or not.
Uh, no, no, no. We're all good. We're all good.
We're we, we we're with you now.
Um, we've got you down for 10 minutes.
Uh, we've got your submission, so you can take that
as read anything you want to highlight.
Uh, that's all good. Uh,
and if you want to leave some time for questions,
we always appreciate that.
So I'll give you a call when you've got about four minutes
to go if you're still, um, presenting.
That's really helpful. Thank you very much in your hands.
Um, well just for those of you who don't know, eco, um,
we were established around about
71, 72, 19 71, 72,
and we have, uh, 14 member organizations and or thereabouts.
Um, and I guess we are very concerned at the way in which
the, this bill, um, seems to want
to sacrifice both private
and public, um, interests for the sake of
a very narrowly confined
or, uh, defined set of projects
for the sake of economic growth.
And we feel that this, um, sort of tries
to be generous in the sense,
and it's good that the, the idea is to give a bit
of a margin, um,
and incentivize people to, um, relinquish land.
But when really unhappy about the way in which people, um,
are given such a short time to decide whether they'll, uh,
you know, make a submission 10 days.
Um, very often people are just not there and,
and won't even know that they've been asked.
Um, it also seems to us that the whole design
of it is imagining that there's somebody sitting
looking at their computer and ready to go immediately.
Um, it doesn't allow four people's
personal circumstances for the fact
that they're in the middle of, um, lambing or fixing fences
or whatever else it might be.
And, um, it, it's just not reasonable
to give people such a short time to say that they want
to participate and then a, a further short time
of 20 working days or whatever it is, um,
and really compressed timeframes.
And yet the, the applicants for the project or the Crown
and the case of the, um, roads of national significance,
they've had ages to decide that they want a project
and to design it and think about it
and taking somebody's land is a really serious thing to do.
Um, and I don't think people will feel at all cooperative
if they're given such a short timeframe.
I think these short timeframes are likely to simply
get people's backs up with mine anyway.
Um, and, you know, land is a
hugely more significant than its market
value for many people.
Um, it, it has ecological and hydrological value.
It has, um, all sorts of cultural and personal
and social associations.
So I think there should be much more requirement
to consider alternatives, alternative route,
or in the case particularly of Rons and,
and some of those, um, fast track projects.
Well, do we really need to do it?
Um, so that's a sort of strategic assessment.
Um, what are the alternatives?
Why should we have to just go in
and ignore the options, for instance,
of better public transport, um,
and of better, um, use of
the capital for other things.
Um, we do appreciate that sometimes you do the Crown needs
to take land, but we don't think this is fair
and we don't think there's sufficient recognition of
to treat it or of, um, the,
the values that are not market values.
Um, we, um, I'm an economist
and I know that there's a great deal of value that is, um,
attached to land that has absolutely no market expression.
Um, and it just seems
that the government is wanting to go so fast
that people are not given a fair chance.
We totally object to the idea that, um,
the environment court is not to be available to people.
I'm thinking of for instance, Patricia Grace
and the hard work she did to try
and hang on to the last little bit of their family land, um,
where everything else had been taken.
Um, and we think it's completely unfair to have a system
where the minister who is essentially, um,
part of a government that has got this, um,
misplaced and narrow-minded pursuit of economic growth, um,
should be the decision maker.
Um, and, and that instead of having an independent arbiter,
um, we have people given time
to make a submission, not very much time,
especially if they have
to get their heads around the whole process.
Um, and they're making a decision, a submission to
the government that is pushing this, who is the proxy
for the applicant or the applicant itself.
And that's just not, not due good due process,
not good government and not fair to people.
It's also fails to recognize Maori cultural values
and the depth and attachment
and responsibility that Maori have to
look after land.
Um, and for instance, many of us who have land in our Cape,
my own personal family, we have a coastal land
that has been managed for its ecosystem values.
It's a sheep and beef place,
but you know, a hot there've been decades
of looking after the embark.
You've got four minute, got four minutes left.
Yeah, well, I, um, think I can probably,
um, look to questions now.
Um, I try to put a little bit of economics in there to, to
help people understand this,
but um, it does seem
that officials are not particularly impressed
by this either.
And, um, we would, yeah, we are welcome questions.
Thank you Kath. Um, colleagues, questions for Kath
before I leap in and ask one myself?
Yeah. Okay. Look, um, Kath, thank you very much.
First question, um, that I had is, um, around the, um,
environment call because, uh, it's been quite a number
of people have, have made the same point about the, um,
the applicant effectively potentially being the, the judge
and jury and executioner as well.
Um, do you think, uh, I mean with
with the fast track legislation, which is one
of the pieces which originally went out with the,
the ministers being the decision makers,
they aren't the decision makers as the,
as the legislation ended up, would another, if you like,
independent, properly qualified group of people, um,
which is maybe a bit quicker than the environment court,
but at least is not the minister, um, be a,
a reasonable sort of way through?
Well, I think the devil is in the detail.
I mean, we, we've been dealing with lots
and lots of bills from this government
and what we see as repeating patterns is a,
that the term streamline is being used, um, when
what it really means is that people are being deprived
of their rights to participate.
Um, it would so depend on what that,
um, committee or whatever is and who appoints them.
And I think there's huge distrust
that this government is appointing their mates
to these special committees and things.
So I wouldn't like to say yes, of course, I,
I think the judicial system is well worth having and using.
Um, and actually the whole fast track thing
is so disreputable, um, and so unfair
and so undemocratic that I think this,
the whole thing should be dumped.
Frankly, I'm not expecting, um, this, it's
A little outside our, uh, jurisdiction. Well,
It's closely connected
and you guys are the only ones we can talk to about it.
So, um,
it would be better than the minister,
but it would so depend on who it was.
Okay, thank you. Who Was making those decisions
and what their, uh, terms of reference and standing is?
What I can say is that there's absolutely no bloody reason
to try
and save time by constricting the time
for landowners when the applicant has had tons of time
to get organized and so have the government agencies.
Okay. Thank you. Any other questions?
I'll ask him one more if I can.
Uh, and that is the process that proceeds this.
Um, most of the time you will need a designation, uh, which,
um, may or may not be a public process in itself,
but at least as some alerting of the landowners.
To what degree does that help?
Well, it all depends on whether the, the landowners,
and of course there's no discussion about the,
the land occupies.
They're just sort of dispensed with altogether,
which I think is also very unfair.
Um, I, I think that
it's never clear whether these people are immediately told
about designation applications
and those in themselves are very much, um,
councils and so on.
Sorry, I'll just, um, kill this.
Um, um,
they themselves, um, can be councils wanting
to be designators.
I, I, I think due process is important
and I don't think the time should be saved at the,
the sharp end of this.
I mean, if you're trying to flog somebody's land,
you might at least be decent about it.
Kath, thank you. Uh, we have come
to time really appreciate your, um, your submission
and uh, answers to questions.
Thank you. Thank For your time, Kath. Thank you. Okay.
Ate? Sure. Okay.
Um, and then our final submitter is Trans
Power, who we have on the line.
Right? Good afternoon,
Matt. And good.
Can you, can you see us and hear us?
We can, yes, yes, yes. Sorry,
We were hoping, we were hoping to be on the big screen
here, but our laptop's doing the thing here,
so we'll, uh, we'll adapt.
That's okay. Technology. Wonderful thing, right?
We've, we've got, we've got your submission
so you can take that as red.
We've got you down for 10 minutes.
Um, I'll give you a call with about four minutes to go.
'cause we do like, generally like to ask questions.
I say that having been the only one who's been asking them,
uh, for the last, uh, couple of submitters.
Um, but hopefully my colleagues can chip in as well.
Um, so anyway, in your hands.
Thanks Andy. Alright, so I'm Matt Fanning, uh, land, head
of Landowner Relations and Property here at Transparent.
I'm joined by my colleague Joanne Moore,
who's our senior legal Joan Council here at Trans.
We are, uh, expecting, um, a further attendee, Wyn Moss,
who's our executive general
manager, customers in External affairs.
So she may sub in at some stage.
She's obviously, um, running a little bit late at the
moment, but we're just crack into it given we haven't got
a huge amount of of time.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here
and to, and to present to you.
We appreciate it. So, um, most of you, all of you will know
who Trans Power is, where the state, state enterprise
who owns and operates the, the National Grid, the, um,
effectively the state highway of electricity
around our Tiera.
Um, we take electricity from where it's generated
and transmit it around the country to, um, communities,
homes, businesses, factories to
where the electricity is consumed.
Um, we've got a, a growing
and increasing need for electrification.
Uh, you would've would've have
to have been hiding under a rock to not have heard much
about the electrification journey over the past few years,
um, with the, um, you know, increase in, um, industrial
and process heat being electrified electric vehicles, um,
step changes in load with data centers
and, and that sort of thing.
So, um, we have, uh, we've got a lot to do over the next,
um, 10 to 20 years.
We've got a, a lot of electrical infrastructure to build
to meet that growing electrification need.
Uh, we, we, we don't, we don't currently,
or we can't access Public Works Act Powers directly.
Currently we access them via section 1 8 6
of the Resource Management Act.
Um, as a, as a network utility operator, uh,
we don't, we, because we are not, uh, considered, um,
central or local government,
we can't access those powers directly.
So we, we do have to ask the Minister for Lands
to Compulsorily acquire land on our behalf.
Uh, we haven't had, we haven't had to do
that a lot in recent memory.
The last time we asked to,
to access compulsory acquisition powers was back in,
in 2014.
Um, so we haven't used a lot in the past,
but when we do need to use it
and if we need to construct a new transmission line
and we have dozens, uh, if not hundreds of, um, of easements
to acquire or, or property rights to acquire, um,
we expect a need
to utilize the Public Works Act more going forward with
that increasing electrification.
I would just add to that, that we do typically acquire
easements as opposed, opposed
to a freehold interest in land.
Um, so, um, we do sometimes acquire freehold interest,
but easements are typically what we
acquire for transmission lines.
Um, Raven has joined us, so, um, we can probably substitute,
um, in here.
Uh, welcome.
Sorry, I'm couple minutes Late. We're actually on this.
Okay, I'll look at that one.
Yeah, I've just, I've just finished a
section if you wanted to
Jump in. Um,
so it is a pleasure to be with you and, um,
and to talk to you about the, um, the,
this piece of legislation.
Um, overall, um, we support the policy intent
of streamlining the land acquisition process
for critical infrastructure, um,
and allowing the need support the need for broader, um,
public work sector reform, noting that, um,
this is the first tranche in that space, uh,
and in particular those changes
that were announced in February 22, 25, um,
allowing trans power to acquire land under the Public Works
Act to streamline processes
for building energy infrastructure.
Thanks. Yeah, so, um, so the, in terms of the specific,
um, changes we've sought to the bill, uh, as I spoke
to earlier, trans Power effectively operates the state
highway network for electricity.
Um, and currently the, um, the, the, the bill, uh,
the list of qualifying projects in the
bill is effectively fixed.
It includes, um, certain listed, um, fast track projects
and it also includes, um, NZ TAs, roads
of National Significance Projects.
Um, we, we are, we are seeking that, um, the act, the,
the bill, I should say, sorry, be amended to provide for,
uh, trans powers major new transmission line build projects
and including associated substations, um,
to be qualifying projects under the, the,
under the, the act.
Um, we suggest, um, that the threshold
that there should be a threshold, um,
and we suggest that threshold should be, um, projects, um,
that are green fields, brand new, um,
transmission line builds, um,
and with a budget of more than 30 million.
Um, and we also suggest in our submission that the process,
um, for including those should be through
and through through the ordering council process, so
that there is, um, the ability for, um, the minister
to include those projects as and when they arise by need.
Um, so some examples of those projects, um,
we have put in our submission, um, we have a need to supply,
uh, Queenstown as a growing, growing city, um, with a need
for electricity running out.
So we need to, um, build infrastructure to,
to meet that growing demand.
Similar challenges in the Western Bay of Plenty with TGA
and um, also other challenges in the central North Island
and also in the Auckland area, south Auckland,
and also North Auckland as well.
So we, um, do see a need to utilize the Public Works Act
and it would be beneficial for us to be able to utilize, um,
the provisions in the bill, um, where we need to,
where we need to use those powers.
And I'll just add to the comments Matt's made,
the projects that we've suggested be included, uh,
probably trans powers equivalent to the Rons
that NCTA has had, uh, benefiting from the bill.
So we certainly haven't suggested
that all trans power projects should benefit from it.
It is a sub, it is, it is the big projects that would be,
um, of national significance in the same way as salons.
Yeah, Thanks. True.
Um, so the, the other change that we, um, you've got,
You've got four minutes left.
Thank thanks Andy.
Um, the other change is that, um, the, uh, one
of our projects that we did did have listed in, uh,
schedule, uh, two of the Fast Track Approvals Act, um,
which, um, is omitted from the, um,
the bill is our high voltage direct current replace cable
replacement and capacity project.
So we had two projects listed in Schedule two
of the Fast Tracked Approvals Act,
but only one of them seems to have carried through into the,
um, the, into the bill.
And, um, for reasons that are unclear to us, the, um, our,
our high voltage direct current cable replacement project
has been left off, um, schedule two A in the bill.
So we are seeking that, that be, that'd be reinstated
because we, um, we do see a potential need
to utilize the Public Works Act for, for that project.
Um, we also just note that, um, we have heard, um,
some submissions to this committee, uh, on Friday
and earlier today expressing concerns around Maori land.
Um, so we wanted to, to put forward that, um, you know,
trans power avoids Maori land wherever possible.
We go through a detailed route selection,
site selection process when, um, identifying, um, the land
that we, we need and, uh, we, we go to every length possible
to avoid Maori land.
Um, also noting there is, there is case law, um,
that Maori land should only be considered
as an absolute last resort as well.
Um, anything further to add to that? Okay.
I think we can hand over
for questions in the time we've got.
Okay, thank you, cam. Uh, thank you very much.
You, me, made a mention about, um, using easements, uh,
mostly instead of public works.
How did, how do you come to a figure for compensation
around the use of easements?
Yeah, um, yes we do, we do use easements.
Um, we, we sometimes do also acquire freehold and, um,
and easements can be acquired under the Public Works Act,
so it's just a lesser interest in land as freehold.
Um, we have those, um, the compensation assessed
by a registered valuer
and the landowner will have a registered valuer
and we will, um, procure services of a,
of a registered valuer
and we will then negotiate a, um, a settlement amount.
Um, that's how we currently acquire easements.
If we had to acquire under the Public Works Act, we would've
to work under the compensation methodology under the Public
Works Act, which is more regimented.
And one, uh, my question
before getting to t uh, the $30 million, where,
how did you arrive at that number as a figure?
And is there gonna be any kind of, if it was
to be adopted into the bill, any kind of, uh,
inflation adjusting or any
suggestion you have along those lines?
Basically, how did you come up with 30 million?
I can answer that question that that is the, um,
threshold under the commerce, um, commission regime
for trans power for major CapEx projects.
So if it's an enhancement
or a new line, that is the
threshold for going down that route.
Cool. Thank you Tangi.
Yeah, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you trans power for your submission.
Um, you are right in that a lot of the awareness
of projects in this bill are largely transport related,
related ones, and that means that they are all listed
your proposal to basically have your infrastructure,
you know, threshold of above 30 million.
And the mechanism being an order in council provides less
scrutiny than those projects
that are listed in the schedule.
So why do you, you know, why do you think that there is a,
an appropriate difference between that as a mechanism?
I think trans power would be happy providing a list
of projects if they're provided more comfort.
The list that we've given is, is projects
that we envisage coming up.
I guess unlike Waka Kotahi,
we don't benefit from a government policy statement,
but certainly we weren't anticipating that there would be
that, that the avenue we've proposed
would result in no discretion.
We certainly expect that there would be some as
to which projects could, could be listed.
No, and I think Just to add to that,
I guess there's sort of scrutiny through other processes.
Anything above 30 million needs to go
through a commerce commission approval process.
There's scrutiny through that process, um, and consultation
and likewise through RMA processes.
No, I, I guess my issue is
that the public have an opportunity to scrutinize this list,
but what you are suggesting is utilizing a,
a secondary legislation process that what,
like the public won't have an opportunity
to scrutinize that.
Um, do you see the, the point of difference there?
I mean, I think what you're saying is
that they won't have an opportunity to scrutinize the list,
but there is an opportunity to scrutinize each project
through other mechanisms is what is what we're suggesting.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, can I just ask one question?
We, we, we've got time,
but, um, uh, we are slightly ahead overall, um,
just in terms of the decision making process.
Um, and one of the things we've had trans power in front
of us several times before, um, stressing
how important the relationships are that are formed, uh,
along the roots where you have transmission lines.
Um, now that's been, that's been spelled out to us time
and time again by trans power.
When you go down this process, uh,
and I know it's, it's been a frus it's often a frustrating
and lengthy process, but if you go down this process,
how do you see that relationship management working?
Because if you've got lead easements,
you're still on somebody else's easements over somebody
else's land with your, you know,
you pile on in the middle of the land, et cetera.
How does that work?
I mean, uh, you, uh, you're absolutely right Andy,
that we have, um, you know, it's very important for us
to have good relationships with landowners, um,
on an enduring basis.
And that is something that we've
talked to this committee about.
I mean, I think, um, you know, we would,
our pre our strong kind of plan a preference is to acquire,
um, property rights voluntarily.
And that, you know, we would, we've always taken
that approach, um, and we would continue to do so.
Um, but we're also conscious with the pace
of electrification
and the need to get work done, um, more promptly
and quickly, that from time to time we may need recourse to,
um, public Works Act legislation.
So hence we have an interest that if we have to use
that plan B mechanism, um, that it works,
uh, effectively for us.
Okay. And, and look, um, that's, that's helpful.
Um, yeah. Okay. No, that's me. Uh, anybody else?
Any other questions? Look, thank you very much.
Really appreciate, uh, the submission and, um,
and uh, coming before us and, uh, answering some questions.
Thank you. Thanks
Very much, team.
Thanks.
Yeah, private.
So now we go into the private zoom.
So if you log off and log.